you know we've only got a certain number
of messy objects left and we had a messy
object left in every single like zeroes
tens twenties thirties we only had one
20s messy algae left so this is the last
of the 20s which i think is is a
milestone all right doc what you go all
right I've got m23 this week so this is
what I'm 23 looks like it's an open
cluster NGC six four nine four unlike a
globular cluster they're a lot less
dense they don't really have that sort
of spherical shape like globular
clusters do either so this is actually
only about 150 stars that are
gravitationally bound together in this
cluster so open clusters form all from
the same molecular gas cloud basically
so you have this gas cloud that starts
to clump together and form stars but
because it wasn't as dense as the gas
clouds that form globular clusters you
don't get that same beautiful sort of
like dense spherical structure that you
get with the globular clusters which is
why when we look at a picture it just
looks like it starts what dictates
whether you become a globular open yeah
basically what the gas was doing before
you formed the cluster so how much gas
was there how dense it is is gonna
determine how many stars you form and
where those stars are and how sort of
gravitationally bound those stars are as
well so this one has got a hundred and
fifty stars but compare that to a
globular cluster where you have like
thousands of stars right so it's quite
sparse this is the kind of area of sky
that it's in so here's m23 again
can't really see it because it's just
stars it's also near m-21 which is
another open cluster and then the trifid
nebula which I think might cover it and
then the Lagoon Nebula that Megan's
already covered as well so it's in a
really cool area of sky it's in the
constellation of Sagittarius which is
basically if you look towards the center
of the Milky Way that's basically
Sagittarius and so it's really busy kind
of area of sky but the actual open
cluster itself is kinda boring looking
it's about two thousand light years away
and it's about 20 light years across so
again it's not that far it's not that
close I kind of want to dub it like the
Goldilocks
open cluster like it's a little bit
basic like you know there's not really
much going for it something know one
thing I did get excited about when I saw
it actually it's about 300 million years
old which sounds all
but actually it's only that twenty
second oldest open cluster is actually
seven more Messier open clusters that
are older than it so it's not that all
this but that seems to be its most
defining feature so that's what I
started thinking about was actually can
open clusters died you know the same way
that stars eventually run out of fuel
and die can these objects that are made
from stars also die or like what is
their eventual fate so as you form the
clusters you have all of the stars you
have the high mass the the big stars
they die off first and then you
obviously get left with less and less
stars that maybe makes it look slightly
boring like we seen in this one but it
also means that they're less
gravitationally bound so you start off
with a very gravitationally stable
system where you have all these stars
come together and then as you lose more
and more the energy in that system
decreases so as you have less and less
energy binding these stars together it
means that the escape velocity from that
system gets less and less as well so the
escape velocity being the velocity you
need to escape its gravitational
influence and the thing is that the
stars in these systems they have their
own random velocity as well just a
little random motion in the cluster and
they're not sort of all just solid
people moving together in one you know
ball arrangement they are moving through
the galaxy together but all with their
own little random motion and the thing
is is that energy decreases in the
cluster you can have the stars that end
up just escaping because they're random
velocity is greater than the eventual
escape velocity that you end up with and
so basically one way for an open cluster
to die is for basically just to disperse
where the stars sort of just all go
their separate ways once there's too few
of them to keep it together anymore
simply another way they can die is that
all the stars burn out and they just
become invisible yeah so that would be
another way would that they would all
just die off of course you've got to
wait a really long time for that and
probably you're sort of random
dispersion is probably gonna happen
first before that happens because these
small stars are very long that they can
just kind of keep chugging along with
the fuel that they have so at least in
our lifetime what are we gonna see that
often and the other way though that's
probably more likely as well than you
know just waiting around for
the stars that all die off is they think
about this cluster is sort of moving
within the galaxy it's going round the
center of the galaxy as one entity
together but as it does that you know
it's gonna bypass a lot of other objects
a lot of egg maybe gas clouds these huge
drank gas cards that could form GABA the
clusters or open clusters that are going
to have huge masses and so if you have
an interaction with something like that
like another object either a close pass
or it fully goes through a gas cloud
you're really going to disturb that open
cluster system that isn't that well
gravitationally bound and so what you
end up doing is you form what's called a
stream and so you can sort of drag out
the stars instead of being a cluster
anymore they're going round the gap the
center of the galaxy again all together
just in a huge big stream that's been
sort of dragged out by this interaction
with this other object it's a bit
difficult to see the open clusters
because obviously this is 150 stars so
you know if that streamed out I'd say
you probably wouldn't notice a change in
you know this background image at all
right the Stars itself we do see this
happen though on a bigger scale so
around the Milky Way the same thing
happens with globular clusters and dwarf
galaxies so they get torn apart by
gravitational interactions and you get
these really cool streams around the
Milky Way that people have detected you
know there's one associated with the
Magellanic Clouds there's something
called the Sagittarius dwarf stream as
well and they look really cool there is
one that I found that people think that
the hidys cluster that this has happened
to that cluster though that it's been
streamed so the hidys cluster is
actually one of the nearest open
clusters to the Sun is about twice as
old as m23 it's about 600 million years
old and actually in studying this they
found that there could be a chance that
about 15% of the stars in the hidys
stream they would be associated with the
hidys cluster well and so this is one of
these open clusters that we think might
be actually going through this process
of dying and streaming out and so that
might give us sort of an eventual sort
of clue for the fate of m23 a bit of a
boring one I can see why it was the last
one in the 20s yeah I feel like people
avoided it for a while there was some
interesting research in sort of the 90s
about whether it had a high metallicity
it just turned out not so it ends up
with this sort of generic
run-of-the-mill basic properties not
that exciting Oh
one coaster and it made it into the list
so we have to do it now hi there thanks
for watching if you'd like to see more
videos with Becky both here on deep sky
videos or our physics Channel sixty
symbols have a look at the playlist I'm
linking here on the screen or in the
video description you can also look at a
play list of all the Messier objects
we've covered so far as we work our way
towards making all 110 videos like this
the happiest I've ever been